# Final: Part 1

## Agent-based modeling as a living model for a living world

Data science is not a new field. We’ve been creating, describing, and analyzing data as a species since the first cavemen saw Gork take a bite of a plant, keel over, and start convulsing. As our technology has advanced, so have our methods for using and analyzing data. This is a concept that Edward Tufte illustrates in masterful detail in his book Beautiful Evidence. From Leonard di Vinci’s star maps, to John Snow’s epidemiology studies, to Google Earth, we can see the evolution of data science paired with that of our species, not just in describing data, but also creating it. This past semester, DATA 441 has worked to learn from existing techniques and to contribute novel insights, just as our ancestors have done. From my perspective as a student studying virology and epidemiology, agent-based modeling has been one of the most useful tools for understanding disease and population dynamics.

We cannot hope to accurately describe a constantly evolving process without a constantly evolving model. Georgescu-Roegen’s insight into the evolving nature of economic systems does not stop with just economics. Economics evolve because our world changes and so do humans and their behavior. His quote could be rephrased as “really, at the heart of all this stuff, is that human systems are not like evolutionary systems, they are evolutionary systems.” In the real world, if people are traveling in and out of a city and the city becomes the epicenter of an Ebola outbreak, will people continue to come and go at the same rates they used to? Absolutely not. People tend to avoid potentially dangerous situations. The city might go into lockdown. The regular traffic might decrease but people who are healthcare professionals might start arriving at higher rates. In this system, people take input from their world and adjust their behavior accordingly. Agent-based modeling is able, just like a biological system, to take inputs from its own simulation to determine its next output. An example of this “living model” is in Barthélemy and Carletti’s “An adaptive agent-based approach to traffic simulation” published in 2017. Another wonderful thing about agent-based modeling is how intuitive it can be to describe. Harry Stevens published “Why outbreaks like coronavirus spread exponentially, and how to “flatten the curve”” in the Washington Post in March 2020. The simplistic agent-based models illustrate the hows and whys of disease spread in a naïve population so that anyone and everyone can understand a potentially complex concept. Especially during public health crisis like the COVID-19 pandemic, disseminating accurate, easy to understand information is absolutely essential to gaining the public’s support for prevention and control measures. 

Agent-based modeling has advanced our understanding of complex problems and expanded our ability to communicate significant scientific findings to the general public. The ability of agent-based models to adapt their agents’ behavior to dynamic changes within the simulation add high levels of precision to the predictive capabilities. They are great examples of “living models” to complement a biological, ever-evolving world.
